---
layout: post
title: Acts 11:19-26
permalink: /church/acts-11-19-26/
category: other
---
This message was delivered June 11, 2023, at the First Baptist Church of Denver. This was delivered preceding my licensing.

A recording of this message is available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PNh_G4RRGsg

* * * 

First, I want to say thank you. Thank you to all of you who read my licensing paper and to those who came out to ask me questions about it. I came away from the experience sweating a bit as you put me to work, trying to explain what it was I meant by anything I said in the paper. I’m not sure I was quite successful in my attempts, but as I saw the occasional nods around the room, I was assured that I was saying something that at least resonated with all of you. So, thank you for putting me to work and for allowing me to prove to myself that I have at least some concrete knowledge of the faith I claim to hold at the core of my being.
It is an interesting thing, though, trying to articulate what it is we believe without stepping into the waters of third century heresies. I remember Nancy asking one question during the examination, about which I waxed eloquently for several minutes, eventually likely losing my train of thought. I of course asked afterward if I had answered her question, to which she responded “well, no… but yes.”

I received another deep theological question regarding the difference between temptation and finding who you really are from a friend yesterday, and again attempted to respond in the best way I knew how. Six text messages later, I placed the final period on what I was responding with, only to realize that I had essentially only said “well, it depends.”
I am thankful for the discussion we had in the library because it proved to myself that, in reality, uncertainty and ambiguity are the only true answers we have. What I have learned in the last four years of seminary essentially boil down to:

_Jesus Loves Me, This I Know, For The Bible Tells Me So._ 

And that is, what it is. I assure you, I have learned much more in addition to that, but I remain unable to answer particular questions about the deepest parts of our lives with certainty. It makes me wonder, admittedly, what the value of all of this is. Why are we here? Are we doing anything?

Brian forced me to attempt to tackle that question during the examination. As I discussed the idea of the Church and how I understood it, I mentioned that, and I quote: “A sense of spirituality is deeply needed and desired in the modern world, and the church will continue to have an active role in fostering it.” Brian, of course, asked me what I meant by that, and how I felt that the world actually desires a sense of spirituality. I gave an answer – one that I’m pretty sure I blacked out during – but an answer nonetheless.  I have spent the last week as a result asking myself how I can be so sure of this, and if this was something I actually believed. 

The good news is I do!
I am here today doing what I do because I wanted something real. I was tired of spending hour after hour trying to fix something that in the grand scheme of things was irrelevant to anything in the world around me. I was tired of building things that only appeared as text on a screen and not something that I could touch, smell, or hear. 
I was tired of doing something I saw as fake as I was being called to something that was real.
	
I don’t think I’m alone in this. While each generation is increasingly more tuned in to the internet and social media, I sense a rising feeling within many of us and our youth that is just tired of sifting through things that are only words on a screen and aren’t things we can touch, smell, or hear. I get the sense that as we continue to move along our trajectory of the prevalence of technology, there will also be more and more of those that outright reject what’s happening on the internet in favor of seeing what’s happening directly in front of us.

AI – the two-letter buzzword going around these days – only solidifies this perspective for me. Personally, I think there will be a revolution around the increasing presence of AI that will result in certainly the optimization, but also potentially the loss, of our jobs. I also think that the fear of AI “taking over the world” is perhaps a bit misplaced. 

For me, the moment that AI would take over the world is the moment that I reject anything that comes of it. The moment that the internet forums I browse become an endless stream of bots talking back and forth between each other is the moment that the internet becomes functionally useless to anyone. This is not a prospect that fears me, but rather excites me. I eagerly await the moment that we return to what is real and to what matters, because I’ve been increasingly tired of sorting through well-worded misinformation about things that don’t exist.

“Well-worded misinformation about things that don’t exist” also happens to be a great way for some to explain what the Bible and Christianity is. As I prepare to be licensed today, I recognize that I am preparing to enter a vocation that is seen increasingly as well-worded misinformation, guiding people into a dream world of misplaced comfort and complicity. I also know what I have seen, and what I have seen is real.

Barnabas saw something real the day he flung wide the doors of the Antioch church. 

Imagine being Barnabas and his friends at this time. They had just visibly witnessed the one who their faith is based in get vaporized into the sky, leaving them to figure things out on their own. And so they do, making plenty of people angry along the way and at the same time not getting very far. They’re trying to do what they’ve been told, but on the surface it’s not working. Perhaps what Barnabas has seen and experienced has all been a lie.

But then, Barnabas hears of this gathering of folks up in Antioch, preaching and teaching to Gentiles who are being blessed with the Spirit at exponential rates. He hadn’t planned this – nobody had planned this, Jerusalem hadn’t planned this or sent individuals to Antioch. How could such a thing be happening? The news that was reaching him likely sounded absurd, especially given he was a Levite and from Greece. He would have known the type of people that he was hearing about, and so, he had to see it with his very own eyes.

As he enters the House of the Lord, he sees the grace of God. He sees people from different regions breaking bread, laughing with each other, and sharing resources together. He sees love, he sees relationships, and he sees joy. He sees that all of these things have taken place without being planned or intentionally developed, and he sees it all happening without him having any kind of curriculum or strategic plan. Barnabas sees Grace, an invisible and indescribable thing that is one of the few things that I personally find to be real.

Friends, I have seen what Barnabas has seen. Every single day that I fling open the white doors of this building, I see grace upon grace upon grace. I see people from across socio-economic lines caring for each other, feeding each other, and providing a place to sleep for those who need it most. I see people from across the gender and sexual spectrums dropping all perceptions about each other and just seeking the common ground between them. I see people being loved and welcomed just as who they are and without expectation of reciprocity. 

In the joy that I have seen and felt and fostered, I have felt and seen grace. In the tears that I have shed for the people that I have served and in every way that I fall short of living up to the expectations I place upon me, grace has been asked for and has been given abundantly. This grace is real, I have felt it, and its presence exists in this church and the church I felt it first – the Federated Church of Green Lake, which is on your bulletin cover. This grace exists in every place where believers fight for justice in spite of the forces that work against it and in every place where grace, and love, have the final word. Beloved, this grace is here, and it is free, and it is real. This unexplainable, totally present but wholly transcendent grace is the most real thing I’ve felt and seen in my life.

This is why I believe the world needs spirituality and why I believe the church is still relevant. It is because what is truly real lies outside of our expectations and our desires. What is truly real is the relationship that you and I have and the relationships that you have with others. What is real is the African concept of Ubuntu – I am because you are, and you are because I am. 

We are real, this is real, and this is made possible only by the grace of God that is in each of us. Grace exists outside of these walls, but heaven help us if we can find it. It is within these walls that I see grace carried out in slow motion each second of every minute, and the only place that I have found that grace comes for free and without exception. Here, something invisible is made visible. SomeONE who is invisible is made visible. We are given a place and a name here, and that is what is real.
	
Maybe I’ve answered the question of why spirituality is still needed and desired in the modern world – maybe I haven’t. But what I can lean on, with certainty, is what I’ve experienced. And what I’ve experienced is that I am – and you are – a witness to the unending, freely given, unquestionable, undiscriminating grace of God that is working this very second in, around, and through us. This is what set apart the newly coined Christians at Antioch – people knew they were Christians by their love, and by their grace, and by their faith. May our love, our grace, and our faith be abundant both in these walls and outside of them. It is what this world needs. May it be so. Amen.  
